# Avalanche Safety Training 1 (AST1)

## Trip Planning
- 3-4km/hr horizontal
- 1hr per 300m vertical

### Avi Bulletin 
[avalanche.ca](https://www.avalanche.ca/forecasts/vancouver-island)
Read all three tabs (Danger Ratings, Problems, Details)
#### Danger Rating
This gives us the rating at 3 different altitudes, and a forecast of how it will change.
#### Problems
Specific sources of potential avalanches, including on which faces they may come from.
These are things to investigate in the snow pack when out in the field.
#### Avalanche Sizes
- 1: 10 ton
- 2: 100 ton (can bury a person)
- 3: 1000 ton (can bury a car/truck)
- 4: 10000 ton (can bury trains)
- 5: 100000 ton (can bury a village)

### Maps
[caltopo](caltopo.com)
use to color slopes  in an area. `slop angle shading`

[gaia gps](gaiagps.com) good for croud sourced gpx tracks.

### Weather
[mountain-forecast.com](mountain-forecast.com) watch for precipitation/wind.

## Packing for a Trip
- transceiver/shovel/probe
- skis/skins/poles/helmet
- clothing/food/water
- med kit/repair kit
- compass/map

## During the Trip
### Observations:
- cracks shooting from ski tracks means storm slab
- woompf sounds when you step means hollow underneath
- ... remember more
- sastrugi (ripples on surface) show direction of wind
- 30-35ยบ slopes are ideal for avis (and fun for skiing)
- \>20-25cm of precipitation is bad for storm slab.

### Digging Pits
Skiing on the surface has a 60-70cm affect depth. Load is distributed well enough underneath.
Digging a pit you don't know if there is wind swept snow, or not, so dig deeper.

#### 1) Find Layers
Slide your finger down the column feeling density. When you find a change, make a horizontal line to denote.

#### 2) Find Layer Densities
In each layer, test the density.
Push lightly with your fist, if you feel resistance at your elbow, poke with 5, then 4 etc fingers down to pencil resistance.

#### 3) Column Test
Make a 30cm x 30cm isolated column of snow.
then start tapping on a shovel layed on top, watching for any shears or changes in the column below.
- 10 taps of fingers bent at wrist
- 10 taps of hands bent at elbow


## Companion Rescue
<10min for rescue >90% chance of survival. Steep drop off after that.

### 1) coarse search1
Follow arrow, make sure number is going down. If number is going up, turn around.

### 2) fine search
- Do not rotate transceiver.
- forwards/backwards close to the snow, finding lowest number
- repeat left/right.

### 3) probe
spiral 30cm strikes apart.
if you strike, read the depth.

### 4) dig
45ยบ slope in to deeper burials.
